# Conclusion and future work

Our results provide clear support for Hypotheses 1 through 4, demonstrating that simulacra instantiated with
cooperative, competitive, altruistic, and self-interested prompts exhibit distinct levels of cooperation in the iterated
Prisoner's Dilemma. This indicates that LLMs can operationalize natural language descriptions of cooperative and
competitive behavior to some extent. However, the remaining hypotheses were not supported, suggesting a more complex
relationship between prompt content and emergent behavior in LLM-generated agents.

Interestingly, the simulacrum instantiated with "you are a participant in a psychology experiment" exhibited behavior
more closely aligned with how real people tend to act in iterated Prisoner's Dilemmas, suggesting that GPT-3.5 possesses
some knowledge about human behavior in such contexts. However, when combined with the other results, it appears that the
LLM struggles to generalize this behavior in a nuanced way beyond a superficial ability to cooperate more or less
depending on whether the role description is altruistic or selfish.

The unexpected pattern of increased cooperation with defectors and decreased cooperation with cooperators challenges our
initial hypotheses and highlights a potential limitation in the LLM's ability to translate altruism or selfishness into
strategies based on conditioned reciprocity. This result suggests that while the agents are sensitive to the general
cooperative or competitive nature of the prompts, their capacity to effectively adapt their behavior to their partner's
actions might be more limited. It is worth investigating whether this behavior is a consequence of the model's training
data, an emergent property of the model architecture, or an artifact of the specific prompts used in the study.

This limitation does not rule out the possibility of interesting emergent behavior in LLM-generated agents, and further
research should explore the potential for more refined or complex prompts to elicit a wider range of cooperative
behaviors, as well as the role of model architecture and training parameters in shaping these behaviors. Investigating
the impact of various partner strategies on the agents' behavior, such as more sophisticated variations of tit-for-tat,
could also shed light on the model's adaptability and alignment with human values.

In future studies, it would be valuable to examine other parameter settings, such as temperature, to explore their
effects on the emergent behavior of LLM-generated agents. Additionally, as more advanced LLMs like GPT-4 become
available, it would be interesting to investigate whether they exhibit similar limitations or are capable of more
nuanced cooperative behaviors in social dilemmas.
